<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?><!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="custom.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets V1.79.1"/><link rel="prev" href="ch01.xhtml" title="REDEMPTORIS MATER"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" epub:type="chapter" id="d5e1611"><div class="titlepage"/>
		<p>(1) Cf. Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 52 and the whole of Chapter VIII, entitled « The Role of the Blessed Virgin Mary, Mother of God, in the Mystery of Christ and the Church. »</p>
		<p>(2) The expression « fullness of time » (pleroma tou chronou) is parallel with similar expressions of Judaism, both Biblical (cf. <span class="emphasis"><em><span class="ss">Gn</span> <span class="ssc">xxix</span>, <span class="ssv">21</span></em></span> ; <span class="emphasis"><em><span class="ss">1S</span> <span class="ssc">vii</span>, <span class="ssv">12</span></em></span> ; <span class="emphasis"><em><span class="ss">Tb</span> <span class="ssc">xiv</span>, <span class="ssv">5</span></em></span>) and extra-Biblical, and especially of the New Testament (cf. <span class="emphasis"><em><span class="ss">Mc</span> <span class="ssc">i</span>, <span class="ssv">15</span></em></span> ; <span class="emphasis"><em><span class="ss">Lc</span> <span class="ssc">xxi</span>, <span class="ssv">24</span></em></span> ; <span class="emphasis"><em><span class="ss">Jn</span> <span class="ssc">vii</span>, <span class="ssv">8</span></em></span> ; <span class="emphasis"><em><span class="ss">Ep</span> <span class="ssc">i</span>, <span class="ssv">10</span></em></span>). From the point of view of form, it means not only the conclusion of a chronological process but also and especially the coming to maturity or completion of a particularly important period, one directed towards the fulfillment of an expectation, a coming to completion which thus takes on an eschatological dimension. According to <span class="emphasis"><em><span class="ss">Ga</span> <span class="ssc">iv</span>, <span class="ssv">4</span></em></span> and its context, it is the coming of the Son of God that reveals that time has, so to speak, reached its limit. That is to say, the period marked by the promise made to Abraham and by the Law mediated by Moses has now reached its climax, in the sense that Christ fulfills the divine promise and supersedes the old law.</p>
		<p>(3) Cf. Roman Missal, Preface of 8 December, Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary ; Saint Ambrose, De Institutione Virginis, XV, 93-94 : PL 16, 342 ; Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 68.</p>
		<p>(4) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 58.</p>
		<p>(5) Pape Paul VI, Encyclical Epistle Christi Matri (15 September 1966) : AAS 58 (1966) 745-749, Exhortation Apostolique Signum Magnum (13 May 1967) : AAS 59 (1967) 465 : 475 ; Exhortation Apostolique Marialis Cultus (2 February 1974) : AAS 66 (1974) 113-168.</p>
		<p>(6) The Old Testament foretold in many different ways the mystery of Mary : cf. Saint John Damascene, Hom. in Dormitionem 1, 8-9 : S. Ch. 80, 103-107.</p>
		<p>(7) Cf. Enseignement de Jean-Paul II, VI/2 (1983) 225f. ; Pape Pie IX, Lettre Apostolique <span class="emphasis"><em>Ineffabilis Deus</em></span> (8 December 1854) : Pii IX P. M. Acta, pars I, 597-599.</p>
		<p>(8) Cf. Const. pastorale sur l’Église dans le monde de ce temps <span class="emphasis"><em>Gaudium et Spes</em></span>, 22.</p>
		<p>(9) Ecumenical Council of Ephesus, in Conciliorum Oecumenicorum Decreta, Bologna 1973, 41-44 ; 59-61 : DS 250-264 ; cf. Ecumenical Council of Chalcedon, o. c. 84-87 : DS 300-303.</p>
		<p>(10) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. pastorale sur l’Église dans le monde de ce temps <span class="emphasis"><em>Gaudium et Spes</em></span>, 22.</p>
		<p>(11) Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 52.</p>
		<p>(12) Cf. ibid., 58.</p>
		<p>(13) Ibid., 63, cf. Saint Ambrose, Expos. Evang. sec. <span class="emphasis"><em><span class="ss">Lc</span> <span class="ssc">ii</span>, <span class="ssv">7</span></em></span> : CSEL 32/4, 45 ; De Institutione Virginis, XIV, 88-89 : PL 16, 341.</p>
		<p>(14) Cf. Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 64.</p>
		<p>(15) Ibid., 65.</p>
		<p>(16) « Take away this star of the sun which illuminates the world : where dœs the day go ? Take away Mary, this star of the sea, of the great and boundless sea : what is left but a vast obscurity and the shadow of death and deepest darkness ? » : Saint Bernard, In Navitate B. Mariæ Sermo-De aquæductu, 6 : S. Bernardi Opera, V, 1968, 279 ; cf. In laudibus Virginis Matris Homilia II, 17 : ed. cit., IV, 1966, 34f.</p>
		<p>(17) Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 63.</p>
		<p>(18) Ibid., 63.</p>
		<p>(19) Concerning the predestination of Mary, cf. Saint John Damascene, Hom. in Nativitatem, 7, 10 : S. Ch. 80, 65 ; 73 ; Hom. in Dormitionem 1, 3 : S. Ch. 80, 85 : « For it is she, who, chosen from the ancient generations, by virtue of the predestination and benevolence of the God and Father who generated you (the Word of God) outside time without coming out of himself or suffering change, it is she who gave you birth, nourished of her flesh, in the last time… . »</p>
		<p>(20) Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 55.</p>
		<p>(21) In Patristic tradition there is a wide and varied interpretation of this expression : cf. Origen, In Lucam homiliæ, VI, 7 : S. Ch. 87, 148 ; Severianus of Gabala, In mundi creationem, Oratio VI, 10 : PG 56, 497f. ; Saint John Chrysostom (Pseudo), In Annunhationem Deiparæ et contra Arium impium, PG 62, 765f. ; Basil of Seleucia, Oratio 39, In Sanctissimæ Deiparæ Annuntiationem, 5 : PG 85, 441-46 ; Antipater of Bosra, Hom. II, In Sanctissimæ DeiparæAnnuntiationem, 3-11 : PG 85, 1777-1783 ; Saint Sophronius of Jerusalem, Oratio 11, In Sanctissimæ Deiparæ Annuntiationem, 17-19 : PG 87/3, 3235-3240 ; Saint John Damascene Hom. in Dormitionem, 1, 70 : S. Ch. 80, 96-101 ; Saint Jerome, Epistola 65, 9 : PL 22, 628, Saint Ambrose, Expos. Evang. sec. <span class="emphasis"><em><span class="ss">Lc</span> <span class="ssc">ii</span>, <span class="ssv">9</span></em></span> : CSEL 32/4, 45f. ; Saint Augustine, Sermo 291, 4-6 : PL 38, 131 8f. ; Enchiridion, 36, 11 : PL 40, 250 ; Saint Peter Chrysologus, Sermo 142 : PL 52, 579f. ; Sermo 143 : PL 52, 583 ; Saint Fulgentius of Ruspe, Epistola 17, VI 12 : PL 65 458 ; Saint Bernard, In laudibus Virginis Matris, Homilia III, 2-3 : S. Bernardi Opera, IV, 1966, 36-38.</p>
		<p>(22) Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 55.</p>
		<p>(23) Ibid., 53.</p>
		<p>(24) Cf. Pape Pie XI, Apostolic Letter Ineffabilis Deus (8 December 1854) : Pii IX P. M. Acta, pars I, 616 ; Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 53.</p>
		<p>(25) Cf. Saint Germanus of Constantinople, In Annuntiationem SS. Deiparæ Hom. : PG 98, 327f. ; Saint Andrew of Crete, Canon in B. Mariæ Natalem, 4. PG 97, 1321f., In Nativitatem B. Mariæ, I : PG 97, 81 1f. Hom. in Dormitionem S. Mariæ I : PG 97, 1067f.</p>
		<p>(26) Liturgy of the Hours of 15 August, Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary, Hymn at First and Second Vespers ; Saint Peter Damian, Carmina et preces, XLVII : PL 145, 934.</p>
		<p>(27) Divina Commedia, Paradiso, XXXIII, 1 ; cf. Liturgy of the Hours, Memomial of the Blessed Virgin Mary on Saturday, Hymn II in the Office of Readings.</p>
		<p>(28) Cf. Saint Augustine, De Sancta Virginitate, III, 3 : PL 40, 398 ; Sermo 25, 7 : PL 46,</p>
		<p>(29) Consitution dogmatique sur la Révélation divine <span class="emphasis"><em>Dei Verbum</em></span>, 5</p>
		<p>(30) This is a classic theme, already expounded by Saint Irenæus : « And, as by the action of the disobedient virgin, man was afflicted and, being cast down, died, so also by the action of the Virgin who obeyed the word of God, man being regenerated received, through life, life… . For it was meet and Just… that Eve should be »recapitulated« in Mary, so that the Virgin, becoming the advocate of the virgin, should dissolve and destroy the virginal disobedience by means of virginal obedience » : Expositio doctrinæ apostolicæ, 33 : S. Ch. 62, 83-86 ; cf. also Adversus Hæreses, V, 19, 1 : 5. Ch. 153, 248-250.</p>
		<p>(31) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Consitution dogmatique sur la Révélation divine <span class="emphasis"><em>Dei Verbum</em></span>, 5.</p>
		<p>(32) Ibid., 5, cf. Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 56.</p>
		<p>(33) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 56.</p>
		<p>(34) Ibid., 56.</p>
		<p>(35) Cf. ibid., 53 ; Saint Augustine, De Sancta Virginitate, III, 3 : PL 40, 398 ; Sermo 215, 4 ; PL 38, 1074 ; Sermo 196, I : PL 38, 1019 ; De peccatorum meritis et remissione, I, 29, 57 : PL 44, 142 ; Sermo 25, 7 : PL 46, 937-938 ; Saint Leo the Great, Tractatus 21, de natale Domini, I : CCL 138, 86.</p>
		<p>(36) Ascent of Mount Carmel, 1. II, Ch. 3, 4-6.</p>
		<p>(37) Cf. Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 58.</p>
		<p>(38) Ibid., 58.</p>
		<p>(39) Cf. Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Consitution dogmatique sur la Révélation divine <span class="emphasis"><em>Dei Verbum</em></span>, 5.</p>
		<p>(40) Concerning Mary’s participation or « compassion » in the death of Christ, cf. Saint Bernard, In Dominica infra octavam Assumptionis Sermo, 14 : S. Bernardi Opera, V, 1968, 273.</p>
		<p>(41) Saint Irenæus, Adversus Hæreses III, 22, 4 : S. Ch. 211, 438-444 ; cf. Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 56, Note 6.</p>
		<p>(42) Cf. Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 56, and the Fathers quoted there in Notes 8 and 9.</p>
		<p>(43) « Christ is truth, Christ is flesh : Christ truth in the mind of Mary, Christ flesh in the womb of Mary » : Saint Augustine, Sermo 25 (Sermones inediti), 7 : PL 46, 938.</p>
		<p>(44) Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 60.</p>
		<p>(45) Ibid., 61.</p>
		<p>(46) Ibid., 62.</p>
		<p>(47) There is a well-known passage of Origen on the presence of Mary and John on Calvary : « The Gospels are the first fruits of all Scripture and the Gospel of John is the first of the Gospels : no one can grasp its meaning without having leaned his head on Jesus’ breast and having received from Jesus Mary as Mother » : Comm. in loan., I, 6 : PG 14, 31 ; cf. Saint Ambrose, Expos. Evang. sec. <span class="emphasis"><em><span class="ss">Lc</span> <span class="ssc">x</span>, <span class="ssv">129</span>-<span class="ssv">131</span></em></span> : CSEL 32/4, 504f.</p>
		<p>(48) Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 54 and 53 ; the latter text quotes Saint Augustine, De Sancta Virginitate, VI, 6 : PL 40, 399.</p>
		<p>(49) Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 55.</p>
		<p>(50) Cf. Saint Leo the Great, Tractatus 26, de natale Domini, 2 : CCL 138, 126.</p>
		<p>(51) Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 59.</p>
		<p>(52) Saint Augustine, De civitate Dei, XVIII, 51 : CCL 48, 650.</p>
		<p>(53) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 8.</p>
		<p>(54) Ibid., 9.</p>
		<p>(55) Ibid., 9.</p>
		<p>(56) Ibid., 8.</p>
		<p>(57) Ibid., 9.</p>
		<p>(58) Ibid., 65.</p>
		<p>(59) Ibid., 59.</p>
		<p>(60) Cf. Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Consitution dogmatique sur la Révélation divine <span class="emphasis"><em>Dei Verbum</em></span>, 5.</p>
		<p>(61) Cf. Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 63.</p>
		<p>(62) Cf. ibid., 9.</p>
		<p>(63) Cf. ibid., 65.</p>
		<p>(64) Ibid., 65.</p>
		<p>(65) Ibid., 65.</p>
		<p>(66) Cf. ibid., 13.</p>
		<p>(67) Cf. ibid., 13.</p>
		<p>(68) Cf. ibid., 13.</p>
		<p>(69) Cf. Roman Missal, formula of the Consecration of the Chalice in the Eucharistic Prayers.</p>
		<p>(70) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 1.</p>
		<p>(71) Ibid., 13.</p>
		<p>(72) Ibid., 15.</p>
		<p>(73) Cf. Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Décret sur l’Œcuménisme <span class="emphasis"><em>Unitatis Redintegratio</em></span>, 1.</p>
		<p>(74) Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 68, 69. On Mary Most Holy, promoter of Christian unity, and on the cult of Mary in the East, cf. Leo XIII, Encyclical Epistle Adiutricem Populi (5 September 1985) : Acta Leonis XV, 300-312.</p>
		<p>(75) Cf. Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Décret sur l’Œcuménisme <span class="emphasis"><em>Unitatis Redintegratio</em></span>, 20.</p>
		<p>(76) Cf. ibid., 19.</p>
		<p>(77) Ibid., 14.</p>
		<p>(78) Ibid., 15.</p>
		<p>(79) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 66.</p>
		<p>(80) Ecumenical Council of Chalcedon, Definitio fidei : Conciliorum Oecumenicorum Decreta, Bologna 1973, 86 (DS 301).</p>
		<p>(81) Cf. the Weddase Maryam (Praises of Mary), which follows the Ethiopian Psalter and contains hymns and prayers to Mary for each day of the week. Cf. also the Matshafa Kidana Mehrat (Book of the Pact of Mercy) ; the importance given to Mary in the Ethiopian hymnology and liturgy deserves to be emphasized.</p>
		<p>(82) Cf. Saint Ephrem, Hymn. de Nativitate : Scriptores Syri, 82, CSCO, 186.</p>
		<p>(83) Cf. Saint Gregory of Narek, Le livre de prieres : S. Ch. 78, 160-163 ; 428-432.</p>
		<p>(84) Second Ecumenical Council of Nicæa : Conciliorurn Oecumenicorum Decreta, Bologna 19733, 135-138 (DS 600-609).</p>
		<p>(85) Cf. Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 59.</p>
		<p>(86) Cf. Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Décret sur l’Œcuménisme <span class="emphasis"><em>Unitatis Redintegratio</em></span>, 19.</p>
		<p>(87) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 8.</p>
		<p>(88) Ibid., 9.</p>
		<p>(89) As is well-known, the words of the Magnificat contain or echo numerous passages of the Old Testament.</p>
		<p>(90) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Consitution dogmatique sur la Révélation divine <span class="emphasis"><em>Dei Verbum</em></span>, 2.</p>
		<p>(91) Cf. for example Saint Justin, Dialogus cum Tryphone ludæo, 100 : Otto II, 358 ; Saint Irenæus, Adversus Hæreses III, 22, 4 : S. Ch. 211, 439-445 ; Tertullian, De carne Christi, 17, 4-6 : CCL 2, 904f.</p>
		<p>(92) Cf. Saint Epiphanius, Panarion, III, 2 ; Hær. 78, 18 : PG 42, 727-730.</p>
		<p>(93) Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, Instruction on Christian Freedom and Liberation (22 March 1986), 97.</p>
		<p>(94) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 60.</p>
		<p>(95) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 60.</p>
		<p>(96) Cf. the formula of mediatrix « ad Mediatorem » of Saint Bernard, In Dominica infra oct. Assumptionis Sermo, 2 : S. Bernardi Opera, V, 1968, 263. Mary as a pure mirror sends back to her Son all the glory and honor which she receives : Id., In Nativitate B. Mariæ Sermo-De Aquæductu, 12 : ed. cit., 283.</p>
		<p>(97) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 62.</p>
		<p>(98) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 62.</p>
		<p>(99) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 61.</p>
		<p>(100) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 62.</p>
		<p>(101) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 61.</p>
		<p>(102) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 61.</p>
		<p>(103) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 62.</p>
		<p>(104) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 62.</p>
		<p>(105) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 62 ; in her prayer too the Church recognizes and celebrates Mary’s « maternal role » : it is a role « of intercession and forgiveness, petition and grace, reconciliation and peace » (cf. Preface of the Mass of the Blessed Virgin Mary, Mother and Mediatrix of Grace, in Collectio Missarum de Beata Maria Virgine, ed. typ. 1987, I, 120).</p>
		<p>(106) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 62.</p>
		<p>(107) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 62 ; cf. Saint John Damascene, Hom. in Dormitionem, I, 11 ; II, 2, 14 ; III, 2 : S. Ch. 80, 111f. ; 127-131 ; 157-161 ; 181-185 ; Saint Bernard, In Assumptione Beatæ Mariæ Sermo, 1-2 : S. Bernardi Opera, V, 1968, 228-238.</p>
		<p>(108) Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 59 ; cf. Pape Pie XII, Constitution Apostolique <span class="emphasis"><em>Munificentissimus Deus</em></span> (1 novembre 1950) : AAS 42 (1950) 769-771 ; Saint Bernard presents Mary immersed in the splendor of the Son’s glory : In Dominica infra oct. Assumptionis Sermo, 3 ; S. Bernardi Opera, V, 1968, 263f.</p>
		<p>(109) Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 53.</p>
		<p>(110) On this particular aspect of Mary’s mediation as implorer of clemency from the « Son as Judge, “cf. Saint Bernard, In Dominica infra oct. Assumptionis Sermo, 1-2 : S. Bernardi Opera, V, 1968, 262f ; Pope Leo XIII, Encyclical Epistle Octobri Mense (22 September 1891) : Acta Leonis, XI, 299-315.</p>
		<p>(111) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 55.</p>
		<p>(112) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 59.</p>
		<p>(113) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 36.</p>
		<p>(114) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 36.</p>
		<p>(115) With regard to Mary as Queen, cf. Saint John Damascene, Hom. in Nativitatem, 6 ; 12 ; Hom. in Dormitionem, 1, 2, 12, 14 ; II, 11 ; III, 4 : S. Ch. 80, 59f. ; 77f. ; 83f. ; 113f. ; 117 ; 151f. ; 189-193.</p>
		<p>(116) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II. Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 62.</p>
		<p>(117) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 63.</p>
		<p>(118) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 63.</p>
		<p>(119) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 66.</p>
		<p>(120) Cf. Saint Ambrose, De Institutione Virginis, XIV, 88-89 : PL 16, 341, Saint Augustine, Sermo 215, 4 : PL 38, 1074 ; De Sancta Virginitate, II, 2 ; V, 5 ; VI, 6 : PL 40, 397-398f. ; 399 ; Sermo 191, II, 3 : PL 38, 1010f.</p>
		<p>(121) Cf. Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 63.</p>
		<p>(122) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 64.</p>
		<p>(123) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 64.</p>
		<p>(124) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 64.</p>
		<p>(125) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 64.</p>
		<p>(126) Cf. Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Consitution dogmatique sur la Révélation divine <span class="emphasis"><em>Dei Verbum</em></span>, 8 ; Saint Bonaventure, Comment. in Evang. Lucæ, Ad Claras Aquas, VII, 53, No. 40, 68, No. 109.</p>
		<p>(127) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 64.</p>
		<p>(128) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 63.</p>
		<p>(129) Cf. Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 63.</p>
		<p>(130) Clearly, in the Greek text the expression « eis ta idia » gœs beyond the mere acceptance of Mary by the disciple in the sense of material lodging and hospitality in his house ; it indicates rather a communion of life established between the two as a result of the words of the dying Christ : cf. Saint Augustine, In loan. Evang. tract. 119, 3 : CCL 36, 659 : « He took her to himself, not into his own property, for he possessed nothing of his own, but among his own duties, which he attended to with dedication. »</p>
		<p>(131) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 62.</p>
		<p>(132) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 63.</p>
		<p>(133) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. pastorale sur l’Église dans le monde de ce temps <span class="emphasis"><em>Gaudium et Spes</em></span>, 22.</p>
		<p>(134) Cf. Pape Paul VI, Discourse of 21 November 1964 : AAS 56 (1964) 1015.</p>
		<p>(135) Pape Paul VI, Solemn Profession of Faith (30 June 1968), 15 : AAS 60 (1968) 438f.</p>
		<p>(136) Pape Paul VI, Discourse of 21 November 1964 : AAS 56 (1964) 1015.</p>
		<p>(137) Ibid., 1016.</p>
		<p>(138) Cf. Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. pastorale sur l’Église dans le monde de ce temps <span class="emphasis"><em>Gaudium et Spes</em></span>, 37.</p>
		<p>(139) Cf. Saint Bernard, In Dominica infra oct. Assumptionis Sermo : S. Bernardi Opera V, 1968, 262-274.</p>
		<p>(140) Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 65.</p>
		<p>(141) Cf. Lettre Encyclique Fulgens Corona (8 September 1953) : AAS 45 (1953) 577-592. Pius X with his Lettre Encyclique Ad Diem Illum (2 February 1904), on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the dogmatic definition of the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary, had proclaimed an Extraordinary jubilee of a few months ; Pii X P. M. Acta, I, 147-166.</p>
		<p>(142) Cf. Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 66-67.</p>
		<p>(143) Saint Louis Marie Grignion de Montfort, <span class="emphasis"><em>Traité de la vraie dévotion à la sainte Vierge</em></span>. This saint can rightly be linked with the figure of Saint Alfonso Maria de’ Liguori, the second centenary of whose death occurs this year ; cf. among his works Le glorie di Maria.</p>
		<p>(144) Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 69.</p>
		<p>(145) Homily on 1 January 1987.</p>
		<p>(146) Const. dogm. sur l’Église <span class="emphasis"><em>Lumen Gentium</em></span>, 69.</p>
		<p>(147) Cf. Concile œcuménique de Vatican II, Consitution dogmatique sur la Révélation divine <span class="emphasis"><em>Dei Verbum</em></span>, 2 : « Through this revelation… the invisible God… out of the abundance of his love speaks to men as friends… and lives among them… , so that he may invite and take them into fellowship with himself. »</p>
	</section><footer/></body></html>